Dear friends,
Heartfelt welcome to the fifth volume of ‘Indian Journal of Educational Research’.
Like other volumes, this volume is also furnished with research articles by persons
well acclaimed in their own field at one hand and by new researches on the other.
It is comprised of twenty five articles and three Ph. D. thesis abstracts to good
quality research covering various aspects of education. The topics include diverse
issues like environmental education, teacher education, woman education, special
education,  medical  education,  curriculum  studies,  educational  technology,
language education, adult & non-formal education, primary education, secondary
education  and  higher  education,  Articles  in  philosophical,  psychological,
sociological and anthropological researches have also been included leading to
the holistic approach of the journal.
We hope that this volume will develop an academic commitment of our esteemed
readers them to more research works in the field of education. It is to be noted
that our journal can be seen at present in our university website (calcuniv.ac.in)
through ‘Education’ Department.
Our  hearted  thanks  to  the  authorities  of  the  University,  our  colleagues  the
contributors, the panel of reviewers and the readers. We are fortunate enough to
have a highly esteemed peer review committee for their continuous endeavours
in  publishing  this  issue.  Dr.  Md.  Kutubuddin  Halder  dererves  for  specially
appreciation his silent work to the journal. We are tying our best to enhance the
quality of the journal. In spite of utmost care, some limitations may crop therein.
It is all due to our constraints to shoulder the responsibility to the perfection.
With  warm  regards,
Dr.  Nimai  Chand  Maiti
Professor,  Department  of  Education,
University  of  Calcutta
vii
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research,
Volume-V,  March  2016,  Pp.  1-11
ISSN  2277-3819
©  University  of  Calcutta
Attitude towards Aids of College Going Students in Respect
to  Certain  Demographic  Features
Amit  Kumar  Maity*  and  Bishnupada  Nanda**
Abstract
The  purpose  of  the  study  was  to  measure  the  attitude  of  HIV/AIDS  among  the
college  students  of  West  Bengal.  1146  undergraduate  students  from  different
colleges of West Bengal were purposively selected. For collection of data a self-
designed demographic data sheet and adapted Bengali version of  “AIDS attitude
scale  of  students”  by  Shrum,  Turner  and  Bruce  (1989)  was  used.  For  analysis
descriptive statistics were used. It was found that the boys possess more positive
attitude  towards  AIDS  than  the  girls,  Commerce  and  science  stream  learners
possess more positive attitude towards AIDS than the Arts stream students, semi-
urban  students  possess  more  positive  attitude  towards AIDS  than  students  from
rural and urban habitat. Students from nuclear families possess more favourable
attitude than the students from rural and joint family background, students from
socially  backward  class  and  students  from  Hindu  faith  possess  more  positive
attitude.  Further  in  depth  study  is  recommended.
Key  words:  Attitude  of  HIV/AIDS,  U.G.  Students.
Introduction
AIDS is most harmful disease caused by Human Immunodefiency Virus (HIV).
It  spoiled  our  most  young  productive  generation  who  are  little  ignorant  and
their attitude towards this disease is not positive. The teenage adolescent college
going  students  are  more  vulnerable  and  risk-prone  group  of  our  society  for
transmission of HIV/AIDS (Tiwari, 2006). According to Ebeniro (2010) the risk
of HIV/AIDS infections among youths in the tertiary institutions has increased
in  recent  years.  Generally  attitude  is  reflected  through  the  level  of  knowledge.
Some  studies  showed  that  the  youths  possess  poor  attitudes  and  practices
towards protection from HIV/AIDS (Mehajeb, 2007).  Another study also
revealed that adolescents possess lower knowledge on the various sexual modes
* Assistant Professor, & HOD, Dept. of B. Ed, Y. S. Palpara Mahavidyalaya. Palpara
Purba  Medinipur.  ramitmaity@gmail.com
** Associate Professor, & HOD, Dept. of Education and Course Coordinator, Special
Education  &  HEPSN  Cell,  Jadavpur  University,  Kolkata-700032
2
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
of HIV transmission (Paul, 2011). Adolescents have lack of scientific knowledge
and  attitude  towards  disease,  health  and  hygiene  and  certain  percentage  of
students do not have proper awareness, knowledge, attitude and beliefs towards
HIV/AIDS  (UNFP,  2007).
Murtala  (2009)  found  that  96%  adolescents  know  about  what  HIV/AIDS
is but only 52.5% of them believed that HIV/AIDS has cure. But most of them
will  not  boycott  HIV/AIDS  infected  friends  from  their  society.  It  means  that
a  large  percentage  of  adolescent  learners  possess  a  positive  attitude  towards
HIV/AIDS.  A  study  conducted  by  Lau  and  Lee  (2004)  showed  that  a  healthy
attitude  towards  AIDS  has  been  documented  in  students  who  possess  good
knowledge of HIV and AIDS. Imogie et. al. (2002) revealed that 88% secondary
school  students  had  heard  about  AIDS,  and  also  showed  positive  attitude
towards  HIV/AIDS  campaign  strategies.
Nagdeo et. al. (2010) found that most of the college going students was aware
of AIDS  as  a  disease  since  it  is  included  in  school  syllabus.  But  only  66.81%
could  give  the  full  form  of  AIDS  and  44.69%  knew  full  form  of  HIV.    They
observed  that  84.95%  students  knew  that  causative  agent  is  a  virus.  87.61%
stated that HIV could be transmitted from mother to baby. 18.41% students think
that  just  by  looking  at  someone  we  can  tell  whether  he  has  HIV  infection  or
not. According  to  Kore  et.al.  (2004)  HIV/AIDS  prevention  is  possible  through
awareness among the college students. They suggest that there is immense need
to conduct awareness programme about HIV/AIDS at school and college
curriculum. According  to Yazdi  et.  al.  (2006)  adolescent  learners  reported  that
TV  (84%)  and  school  teachers  (66%)  were  the  best  sources  of  HIV/AIDS
information instead of parents (27%) and school books (15%). Only 53% were
aware  that  condoms  protect  against  infection  through  sexual  intercourse.
Abrar  &  Ghorai  (2010)  observed  that  adolescents  of  developing  countries
have  minor  knowledge  about  HIV/AIDS  and  less  than  half  of  young  people
can  correctly  identify  two  ways  to  avoid  HIV/AIDS  (Population  Reference
Bureau,  2006).  Population  studies  revealed  that  adolescents  of  10-24  years
comprise  27%  of  the  global  population  and  that  figure  sore  up  to  30%  in  less
developed countries (Population Reference Bureau, 2006). HIV/AIDS infection
rises  dramatically  in  many  countries  (the  Columbia  Encyclopedia,  2008)  and
sexually transmitted infections are a major international health issue and
adolescents  are  particularly  vulnerable  (East  et. al.,  2007),  yet  in  our  country
awareness  building  in  this  issue  is  poor  and  in  school  and  college  curriculum
discussion  about  HIV/AIDS/  STIs  are  not  included  till  date.    Lindberg  et.  al.
(2006)  observed  that  male  adolescent’s  risky  behaviour  put  them  at  risk  for
STD, HIV and AIDS. Baldwin and Baldwin (1988) observed that young sexually
3
Maity  and  Nanda
active  students  are  potentially  at  risk  for  contracting  HIV/AIDS/STIs  due  to
their  sexual  behaviour  as  well  as  drug  taking  behaviour.
India  is  fertile  ground  for  HIV/AIDS  epidemic  because  of  uncertainty  of
young  people,  rapid  westernization,  drug  addiction,  economic  frustration  of
young  generation,  negative  peer  pressure  (Nathak  &  Nanda,  2013),  family
problems and curiosity about sex. Lack of effective prevention programmes and
limited scope of treatment of HIV/AIDS makes young generation more
vulnerable  to  this  most  harmful  disease.  The  present  study  was  undertaken  to
investigate the attitude towards HIV/AIDS of adolescent undergraduate learners
of  West  Bengal  after  media,  social  network  and  internet  revolution.
Major  Research  Questions
X Whether  adolescent’s  gender  influences  the  level  of  attitude  towards
HIV/AIDS?
X Whether class/stream of study influence the attitude towards HIV/AIDS?
X Whether  age  of  samples  influences  the  attitude  towards  HIV/AIDS?
X Whether religion has any influences on the attitude towards HIV/AIDS?
X Whether  habitat  factor  influences  the  attitude  towards  HIV/AIDS  of
respondents?
X Whether  family  structure  influences  the  attitude  towards  HIV/AIDS?
X Whether  caste  influences  the  attitude  towards  HIV/AIDS?
Objectives
X To  study  the  college  going  students’  attitude  towards  HIV/AIDS.
X To compare the attitude towards HIV/AIDS among certain demographic
social  groups.
Method
Sample
For  collection  of  relevant  data  1146  Under  Graduate  students  from  ten  Govt.
sponsored colleges of West Bengal were considered as the sample of the present
study.  The  demographic  variables  of  the  selected  samples  were  shown  in  the
following  table:


Tool
For  collection  of  relevant  data  from  the  respondents  a  structured  demographic
data  sheet  and  “AIDS  attitude  scale  of  students”  were  used.  This  scale  was
developed by Shrum, Turner and Bruce (1989) and adapted in Bengali by Maity
and  Nanda  (2009)  in  collaboration  with  other  experts. The  scale  is  to  measure
attitudes  of  adolescents  and  Post  adolescents  towards  AIDS  and  people  who
have AIDS or HIV infection. This scale addresses domains like fears related to
HIV  contamination  and  causal  contact,  moral  issues  and  topics  related  to  legal
and  social  welfare  issues.


Findings
From  this  study  it  is  observed  that:
1. Boys  possess  more  positive  attitude  about  HIV/AIDS  than  the  girls.
2. Students  from  Commerce  and  Science  stream  possess  more  favourable
attitude  about  HIV/AIDS  than  the  students  from  Arts  stream.
3. Students in the age group 19 to 20 years possess more positive attitude
about  HIV/AIDS  than  the  students  in  the  age  group  17-18  and  18-19
years.
4. When  religious  faiths  of  the  respondents  were  considered  it  is  found
that  the  respondents  from  Hindu  faith  possess  more  favourable  attitude
about  HIV/AIDS  than  the  respondents  from  Islamic  faith.
5. Students  form  semi  urban  habitat  possess  more  positive  attitude  about
HIV/AIDS  than  the  students  from  rural  and  urban  habitat.
6. Students from nuclear family background possess more favourable
attitude about HIV/AIDS than the students from broken and joint
families.
7. ST  and  SC  students  possess  more  favourable  attitude  about  HIV/AIDS
than  the  OBC  and  General  Caste  students.
Discussion
In  the  present  study  it  was  found  that  the  boys  possess  more  positive  attitude
about HIV/ AIDS than the girls, though this mean difference is not significant.
Attitude  of  HIV/AIDS  are  significantly  correlated  with  exposure  to  HIV/AIDS
education  i.e.  greater  the  exposure  to  HIV/AIDS  education,  the  greater  the
knowledge  of  HIV/AIDS.  In  the  study  of  Pramanik  et.al.  (2006)  statistically
significant  gender  differences  were  found  in  which  the  female  respondents
reported  less  exposure  to  HIV/AIDS  education  than  did  the  male  respondents.
In their study respondents (n = 186) were taken from four New Delhi City Proper
schools in the age group 18-20 years. The study of McManus and Dhar (2005)
again indicated that knowledge about STIs other than HIV/AIDS was very poor
among respondent girls. The majority (71%) had not heard about genital Herpes
and  almost  half  had  not  heard  about  Gonorrhea  (44%)  or  Syphilis  (43%). This
is  of  particular  concern  in  developing  countries  like  India,  as  STIs  such  as
Chlamydia, Trichomoniasis, Syphilis and Gonorrhea are second only to maternal
morbidity  and  mortality  as  the  cause  of  death,  illness  and  years  of  healthy  life
lost  among  women  in  their  child  bearing  years  (Chen  et.  al.,2002).  Odu  and
Akanle (2008) observed that undergraduate youths (15-30 years) have very high
knowledge of key basic concept on HIV/AIDS but many youths have
misconceptions about the cure of AIDS. They also found that most respondents
8
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
of  South/West  Nigeria  were  sexually  active  and  were  engaged  in  high  risk  sex
such  as  casual  same  sex,  multiple  sexes  and  sex  in  exchange  for  money  and
favour.  Diclement  et.al.  (1992)  have  reported  that  people  practice  unsafe  sex
despite  their  knowledge  of  HIV/  AIDS.
In the present study it is found that the respondents from the Commerce and
science background possess slightly more positive attitude than the students from
Arts  and  Commerce  stream.  Normally  this  result  is  expected  as  students  from
the science stream have more exposure to causes of diseases and its preventive
measures,  sexual  issues,  reproductive  biology  and  health.  Unlike  other  studies
(Deshmuka  et.al.,  1998)  which  reported  a  better  knowledge  among  science
students (compared to other streams), present study did not find any significant
difference in the attitude of HIV/AIDS across various streams. The same report
was  established  in  the  study  of  Lal  et.al.  (2000).  Jodati  et.al.  (2007)  observed
that  medical  compared  to  non-medical  students  seem  to  be  more  alert  on  the
preventive strategies of the HIV/AIDS. Tan et.al. (2006) also found that students
majoring in Medicine performed better (more knowledgeable and tolerant) than
non-medical students. Meundi et.al. (ibid) found that higher HIV/AIDS
knowledge  scores  were  significantly  associated  with  higher  education,  higher
frequency  of  reading  newspapers  and  listening  to  radio  or  watching  television.
Hennink et.al. (2005) found that young men collected a wide variety of
information  from  different  outside  sources.
In respect to respondents attitude about HIV/AIDS students age (19-20 yrs)
was  found  to  be  significant  than  the  students  in  the  age  group  17-18  yrs.  and
18-19 yrs. Macleod (1999), Naidoo (2001), Penxa (1992) found that the learners
in the age group 13 to 18 years showed positive attitudes towards sex education
whereas students of 19 years and above showed negative attitudes towards sex
education.  The  finding  of  research  question  shows  that  there  is  significant
difference in the attitude of HIV/ AIDS of youths who live in semi-urban, urban
or  rural  locations.  The  findings  of  this  study  disagrees  with  NARHS  (2003)
and  Lal  et.al.  (2000)  which  reported  that,  the  knowledge  and  attitude  of  HIV/
AIDS in youths in urban areas were higher than those in the rural but this study
agrees  with  the  study  of  Odu  and  Akanle  (2008).  This  could  be  because  the
students  from  rural,  urban  and  semi-urban  locations  could  have  come  from
similar types of educational and socio-economic background and therefore their
knowledge  might  be  similar.  Present  study  also  found  that  nuclear  family
background  students  possess  more  favourable  attitude  about  HIV/AIDS  than
the  students  from  broken  and  joint  families.  It  may  be  due  to  the  cause  that
everybody in the state now has equal opportunities to listen radio, watching TV
and  reading  print  media  and  therefore  the  youth  of  all  these  three  locations
have  equal  opportunities  for  HIV/AIDS  messages.  Serlo  (2008)  found  that  the

Finnish  and  Kenyan  University  students  had  a  good  level  of  knowledge  and
attitude  concerning  HIV  and AIDS  and  these  informations  they  obtained  from
electronic and print media. Same result was found by Hang et.al. (1996) in China
and  Meundi  et.al.  (2006)  in  Karnataka,  India.
From  this  study  it  can  be  concluded  that  in  all  levels  of  school  and  college
curriculum  HIV/AIDS  awareness  should  be  included  and  education  should  be
recommended  as  the  best  line  of  defense  against  the  spread  of  the  HIV/AIDS.
References
Abrar  N.,  &  Ghouri  A.M.  (2010).  AIDS/HIV  Knowledge,  attitude  and  beliefs  of
adolescents  of  Pakistan.  European  Journal  of  Social  Sciences,  16(2),  267-277.
Baldwin J.D., & Baldwin J.I. (1988). Factors affecting AIDS-related sexual risk-taking
behavior among College Students. The Journal of Sex Research, 25(2), 181-196.
Chen S., Gibson S., Katz M., Klausner J., Dilley J., & Schwarez S. (2002). Continuing
increase in sexual risk behaviour and sexually transmitted disease among men who
have  sex  with  me.  Sanfrancisco,  California,  1992-2001.  American  Journal  of
Public  Health,  92,  13-87.
Deshmukh  J.S.,  Wadhva  S.K.,  &  Zodpey  S.P.  (1998).  Knowledge  and  attitudes  of
University  students  in  Nagpur.  Indian  Journal  of  Medical  Science,  52,  302-308.
Diclement R.J., Durbin M., Siegel D., Kransnovsky F., Lazarus N., & Omacho T. (1992).
Determinants  of  condom  use  among  junior  High  School  students  in  a  minority
inter-city  School  District.  Pediatric,  89  (2),  197-202.
East L., Jackson D., O’Brien L., & Peters K. (2007). Use of the male condom by hetero-
sexual  adolescents  and  young  people:  literature  review.  Journal  of  Advanced
Nursing,  59(2),  103–110.
Ebeniro D.C., (2010). Knowledge and beliefs about HIV/AIDS among male and female
students of Nigerian Universities. Journal of Comparative Research in
Anthropology  and  Sociology,  1(1),  121-131.
Hang  G.,  Xu  J.,  &  Gong  Z.  (1996). A  study  on AIDS  related  knowledge,  attitude  and
behaviour  in  servicemen  in  China.  Medline  Chung-Hua-Yu-Fang-I-Hsueh-  Tsa-
Chih,  March,  30  (2),  94-97.
Hennink M., Rana I., & Ikbal R. (2005). Knowledge of personal and sexual development
amongst  young  people  in  Pakistan.  Culture,  Health  &  Sexuality,  7(4),  319-332.
Imogie  A.O.,  Iweze  F.,  &  Egbochuku  E.O.  (2002).  The  perceived  knowledge  and
awareness  of  HIV/AIDS  by  secondary  school  students  in  Benin  city,  Nigeria.
West  African  Journal  of  Nursing.  13(1),  12-16.
Jodati A., Nourabadi G., Hassanzadeh S., Dastgiri S., & Sedaghat K. (2007). Impact of
Education on Knowledge and Attitude on HIV/AIDS Prevention. Rawal Medical
Journal  (The  Journal  of  the  Pakistan  Medical  Association),  32(1),  1-4.
Kore S.J., Anahita P., Yogini N., Santosh P., & Ambiye V.R. (2004). Attitude, Knowledge
and  beliefs  about  HIV/AIDS  in  College  going  adolescents.  Bombay  Hospital
Journal,  46(02),
Lal  S.,  Vasan  R.S.,  Sankara  Sarma  P.,  &  Thankappan  K.R.  (2000).  Knowledge  and
10
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
attitude  of  college  students  in  Kerala  towards  HIV/AIDS,  sexually  transmitted
diseases  and  sexuality.  National  Medical  Journal  of  India,  13,  231-236.
Lau J.T.F., & Lee S.S. (2004). Evaluation of educational program on AIDS in secondary
schools  in  Hong  Kong.  Proceedings  of  the  10th  International AIDS  conference,
August  7-12,  2004.  Yokohama,  Japan.  [Cited  2004  January  22].
Available  at:  http://www.csu.med.  cuhk.edu.hk/hkaids/crp/l.htm.
Lindberg  C.,  Lewis-Spruill  C.  &  Crownover  R.  (2006).  Barriers  to  sexual  and  repro-
ductive health care: Urban male adolescents speak out. Issues in Comprehensive
Pediatric  Nursing,  29(2),  73-88.
McManus, Alexandra & Dhar, Lipi (2005). Study of knowledge, perception and attitude
of  adolescent  girls  towards  STIs/HIV,  safer  sex  and  sex  education:  (A  Cross-
sectional  survey  of  urban  adolescent  school  girls  in  South  Delhi,  India).
Mehajeb,A.Y.,  (2007).  HIV/AIDS  Knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices  among  persons
with  sensory  disabilities  in  Addis  Ababa:  The  case  of  ENAB  and  ENAD.
submitted to the School of Graduate studies of Addis Ababa University in Partial
Fulfillment  of  the  Requirements  for  Master’s  Degree  in  Social  Work  (MSW).
Meundi  A.D.,  Amma  A.,  Rao  A.,  Shetty  S.,  &  Shetty  A.K.  (2006).  Cross-Sectional
population-based  study  of  knowledge,  attitudes,  and  practices  regarding  HIV/
AIDS  in  Dakshina  Kannada  District  of  Karnataka,  India.
Murtala, Mohammed Ruma (2009). Knowledge and awareness of HIV/AIDS amongsome
senior secondary school students in Katsina, Nigeria. Bayero Journal of Pure and
Applied  Sciences,  2(2),  121-126.
Nagdeo N.V., Thakar Y.S., & Thombare V.R. (2010). Awareness and beliefs of College
students in Nagpur: AIDS factor. Journal of Recent Advances in Applied Sciences
(JRAAS).  25,  45-47.
Nahed A.,  &  Ghouri  (2010). AIDS/HIV  Knowledge  attitude  and  beliefs  of  adolescents
of  Pakistan.  European  Journal  of  Social  Sciences,  16(2),  267-277.
Nathak  A.,  &  Nanda  B.P.  (2013).  Causes  of  smoking  habit  among  the  girls:  A  cross-
sectional study. Paper presented in National Seminar on counselling and
rehabilitation:  reaching  the  unreached  funded    by  University  with  potential  for
excellence (UPE-II) SCHEME, UGC. Special Education & HEPSN Cell,
Jadavpur  University,  Kolkata.
National Reproductive Health Survey (NARHS) (2003). Nigerian Demographic Health
Survey.  Federal  Ministry  of  Health,  Abuja,  Nigeria.
Odu,  Bimbala  Kemi  & Akanle,  Florence  Foluso  (2008).  Knowledge  of  HIV/AIDS  and
sexual  behaviour  among  the  youths  in  South  West  Nigeria.  Humanity  &  Social
Sciences  Journal,  3(1),  81-88.
Paul  M.,  (2011).  The  knowledge  of  and  attitudes  towards  HIV/AIDS  among  post-
secondary students in a southern Ethiopian city. A Thesis submitted to the School
of  Graduate  Studies  in  Partial  Fulfillment  of  the  Requirements  for  the  Degree
Master  of  Science  in  Nursing  at  the  McMaster  University.
Pramanik  S.,  Chartier  M.,  &  Koopman  C.  (2006).  HIV/AIDS  stigma  and  knowledge
among  predominantly  middle-class  High  School  Students  in  New  Delhi.  India.
J.  Commun.  Dis.,  38(1),  57-69.

Population  Reference  Bureau.  (2006). The Worlds Youth  Data  Sheet,  Connecticut Ave.
Washinghton,  DC,  retrieved  March,  14,  2010.
form  http://www.prb.org/pdf06/WorldsYouth2006DataSheet.pdf.
Serlo K., (2008). University students’ attitudes towards HIV/AIDS in Finland and in Kenya.
University of Oulu, Finland.
Shrum  J.,  Turner  N.,  &  Bruce  K.  (1989).  Development  of  an  instrument  to  measure
attitudes  towards  AIDS.  AIDS  Education  &  Prevention,  1,  222-230.
Tan  X.,  Pan  J.,  Zhou  D.,  Xie  C.,  Wen  X.  &  Hong  Y.  (2006).  HIV/AIDS  Knowledge,
attitudes and behaviours among undergraduate students in China. Journal of US-
China  Medical  Science,  3(5),  39-45.
Tiwari K. (2006). HIV/AIDS Awareness in Uttar Pradesh. Indian Journal of Population
Education,  March,  2006.
United Nations Population Fund (UNPF) (2007). Preventing HIV Infection: Young People.
Population Issues. UNFPA website. Last visited 1-26-2008.
Yazdi C.A., Aschbacher K., Arvantaj A., Naser H.M., Abdollahi E., Asadi A., Mousavi M.,
Narmani M.R., Kianpishe M., Nicfallah F., & Moghadam A.K. (2006). Knowledge,
attitudes and sources of information regarding HIV/AIDS in Iranian adolescents.
AIDS Care, 18(8), 1004-10.
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research,
Volume-V,  March  2016,  Pp.  12-23
ISSN  2277-3819
©  University  of  Calcutta
* Head & Associate Professor, Department of Education, School of Humanities and
Social  Sciences,  Tezpur  University,  Napaam,  Sonitpur,  Assam-784028
Email: dranjali1975@gmail.com
** Asst.  Professor,  St.  Xaviers Teachers Training  College,  Phagi,  Jaipur,  Rajasthan.
Email: neharawatenglish@gmail.com
Blending  the  Technologies  for  Qualitative  Learning
Anjali  Sharma*  and  Neha  Rawat**
Abstract
As  human  beings,  the  desire  to  learn  is  in  our  nature.  It  is  our  intrinsic  desire
to acquire knowledge, but the way in which we learn and reasons for our learning
can  be  very  different.  Teaching  and  learning  is  a  process  that  includes  many
variables.  Interplay  of  these  variables  creates  a  highly  conducive  environment
for learners to achieve their learning goals and enhance overall quality of learning.
This  paper  is  themed  on  discussing  modern  blended  technologies  supporting
qualitative learning environment by merging of various teaching-learning
variables.  To create a comprehensive picture it is further sub-divided into
following  sub-themes  as  (1)  Essentials  of  qualitative  teaching-learning  process,
(2) Understanding concept of Blended learning and (3) Latest Blended
technologies. Under essential of qualitative teaching-learning process it discusses
variables  of  learning  in  terms  of  various  schools  of  learning  perspective,  pillars
of  quality  of  learning,  aspects  of  teaching-learning  process  and  essentials  of
learning  process.  Further  sections  develop  an  insight  of  blended  learning  and
technologies  discussing  in  detail  elements,  formats,  types  and  examples  of
blended learning. Finally paper after discussing blended learning aspects in every
way  leads  us  to  envisage  that  it  is  a  definitive  answer  to  bridge  modern
technological teaching and traditional methods for achieving qualitative goals of
learning.
Key  Words:  Blended  Technology,  Qualitative  Learning
Introduction
As  human  beings,  the  desire  to  learn  is  in  our  nature.  God  has  created  us  to
be  inquisitive  and  creative.  It  is  our  intrinsic  desire  to  acquire  knowledge,  but
the  way  in  which  we  learn  and  reasons  for  our  learning  can  be  very  different.
According to Random House College dictionary “to learn is to acquire
knowledge  or  skill  by  study,  instruction  or  experience”. Teaching  and  learn

is  a  process  that  includes  many  variables.  These  variables  of  learning  can  be
broadly  understood  under  major  areas  of  educational  theory  and  philosophy.
These are various schools of learning perspective, pillars of quality of learning,
aspects of teaching-learning process and essentials of learning process.Interplay
of these variables creates a highly conducive environment for learner to achieve
their learning goals and enhance overall quality of learning. This paper is themed
on  discussing  modern  blended  technologies  supporting  qualitative  learning
environment. To create a comprehensive picture of this theme it provides insight
on  following  sub-themes:
(1) Essentials  of  qualitative  teaching-learning  process
(2) Understanding  concept  of  Blended  learning
(3) Latest  Blended  technologies.
Before  moving  towards  blended  learning  it  is  essential  to  understand  what
qualitative learning is and how an environment for it can be achieved. Following
section concentrates on elaborated discussion of essential variables of qualitative
learning  process.
(1) Essentials  of  Qualitative  Teaching-Learning  Process
Over  the  past  century,  various  perspectives  on  learning  have  emerged. Among
them  are–behaviourist  (response  to  external  stimuli);  cognitivist  (learning  as  a
mental  operation);  and  constructivist  (knowledge  as  a  constructed  element
resulting from the learning process).Instead of talking separately on each one it
would be better considering all in an integrated way so that a range of possibilities
can be added to the learning experiences. In this process of integration we should
consider  the  following  factors  also–cognitive  style,  learning  style,  the  multiple
nature  of  intelligence  and  diverse  cultural  background.    The  interaction  of  all
these factors provides unique way of teaching learning process that is often called
as system approach. This approach also provides a way of looking at ourselves,
the environment in which we teach, and the environment around us. Using this
perspective we can examine the process in a better way and can design the process
even  in  a  better  way  itself  (Khandai  &  Khan,  2011).
Technology has long been used as a support for learning, for example, the use
of  radio,  film,film  strips  and  overhead  projectors.  During  past  several  decades,
however,  the  advancement  of  technology  has  led  to  comprehensive  teaching
and  learning  via  more  advanced  technologies  like  audio  conferencing,  video
conferencing,  web  conferencing  and  online  learning  management  system.  The
new technologies are rapidly changing the face of education and make learning
qualitative  day  by  day.  In  this  changed  educational  environment  it  is  essential
to  develop  design  principles  and  process  that  will  lead  to  effective  educational
14
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
experiences. These effective principles include: 1) access, 2) learning effective-
ness,  3)  teacher  satisfaction,  4)  learner  satisfaction  and  5)  cost  effectiveness
(Sloan-C  five  pillars  of  Quality).
As we can understand that teaching learning process is the heart of
educational  system.  It  is  the  most  powerful  instrument  of  creating  knowledge
but now a days we are moving towards flexible way of delivering, creating and
disseminating  knowledge  with  the  help  of  advanced  technology.  Before  taking
major  discussion  on  blended  learning  first  we  should  understand  four  aspects
of  teaching  learning  process  (Laurillard,1994),  as  follows:
i) Discussion–  between  the  teacher  and  learner.
ii) Interaction– between the learner and some aspects of the world defined
by  the  teacher.
iii) Adaptation–  of  the  world  by  teacher  and  action  by  the  learner.
iv) Reflection–  on  the  learner’s  performance  by  both  teacher  and  learner.
Gagne (1987) suggested learning tasks, from his learning theory nine instructio-
nal events and corresponding cognitive process has come out as a mile stone in
the  field  of  teaching  learning  making  learning  qualitative:
1) gaining  attention  (reception)
2) informing  learners  about  objectives  (expectancy)
3) stimulating  recall  of  prior  learning  (retrieval)
4) presenting  the  stimulation  (selective  perception)
5) providing  learning  guidance  (semantic  encoding)
6) eliciting  performances  (responding)
7) providing  feedback  (reinforcement)
8) assessing  performance  (retrieval)
9) enhancing  retention  and  transfer  (generalization).
Today technology has totally revolutionized all walks of life with education no
exception. Technological innovations have facilitated teaching-learning process
by invoking leaner’s all domains cognitive, affective and psycho-motor to make
learning more qualitative. But as evident from human history, every boon has its
negative effects so has technology also. With increasing technological invasion
in education role of traditional classroom learning have come into debate about
its significance in this changing scenario. In the words of Bill Gates, “Technology
is just a tool. In terms of getting the kids working together and motivating them,
the  teacher  is  most  important.”  (Rao,  2012).Though  it  is  unanimously  agreed
among educationists all across the world that no technology can replace teacher
yet  it  remains  a  challenge  to  find  out  solutions  for  optimizing  the  benefits  of

technology  and  traditional  teaching  for  learners.  This  quest  led  us  to  blended
learning  which  is  discussed  in  the  next  section  in  detail.
(2)  Concept  Development  of  Blended  Learning
Blended  learning(BL)  or  hybrid  learning  describes  a  learning  environment  that
either combines teaching method, delivery methods, media formats or a mixture
of  all  these.  It  also  refers  to  integrated  learning  activities  such  as  a  mixture  of
online  and  face-to-face  learning.  In  other  words,  BL  is  a  mixture  of  e-learning
and  traditional  types  of  learning.  It  is  mentioned  as  the  integrated  combination
of  traditional  learning  with  web  based  online  approaches,  the  combination  of
media and tools deployed in an e-learning environment and the combination of a
number of pedagogical approaches. Among the benefits of BL reported by recent
researches were to provide students with more control over learning, help foster
critical  thinking  and  effectiveness  of  online  assessment  system  and  computer
skills.
The  main  objective  of  blended  learning  is  improving  learning  effectiveness
over  either  pure  traditional  classroom  learning  or  pure  e-learning. The  blended
technology  is  merging  of  pedagogical  approaches  with  technology  enhanced
approaches  to  create  optimum  learning  environment  to  make  the  learning
qualitative.
X Elements  in  Blended  Learning
To  understand  comprehensively,  it  is  essential  to  go  through  with  elements  of
Blended  learning.  Blended  learning  includes  a  combination  of  computer-based
and/or  on-line  and  face-to-face  elements  and  a  mix  of  formats,  media  and
methods  so  the  most  appropriate  and  effective  approach  can  be  used  for  each
part  of  the  learning  experiences.
Formats
X Teacher / instructor may work face-to-face with students or they may work
independently  in  a  self-paced  way.
X The  conference  place  could  be  classroom,  community  centre,  conference
hall  and  computer  lab  etc.
X Teacher  and  students  may  work  at  same  place  or  other  place  and  some
of  time  together  or  separated  mode.  Teacher  may  suggest  students  to  join
on-line  learning  communities  and  discussions.
X Teacher  may  suggest  students  to  join  web-based  tutorials  or  activities.
Media
Teacher may use CDs, Videotapes, audio tapes, online chat, computers websites
and  games.  Some  of  them  may  be  online  or  offline.
16
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
Methods
Teacher may work one-to-one with students. S/he may give group projects and
s/he  may  put  different  groups  together  to  work  on  similar  topics.
X Dimensions  of  Blended  Learning
Blended  learning  combines  one  or  more  following  dimensions  and  there  may
be  some  kind  of  overlapping  also.  Before  discussing  blending  of  technologies
first  we  go  through  with  various  dimensions
X Blending  offline  and  online  Learning
Blended  learning  combines  online  and  offline  forms  of  learning  where
online simply means use of internet or intranet and offline means traditional
classroom settings .We can assume in this way a learning program provides
study  material  and  research  resources  over  the  web  while  instructor–led,
classroom  sessions  as  a  main  source  of  learning.
X Blending  self-paced  and  live  collaborated    Learning
Self-paced learning implies solitary and on demand at a pace that is managed
or controlled by the learner. Collaborated learning on the other hand offers
a  more  dynamic  communication  among  many  learners  that  brings  about
knowledge  sharing.  The  blending  of  self-paced  and  collaborated  learning
may  include  a  new  product  followed  by  a  moderate;  live  online,  peer-to-
peer  discussion  of  the  material  application  to  the  learner.
X Blending  structured  and  unstructured    Learning
All  the  forms  of  learning  do  not  imply  in  structured  and  formal  way  as
most  of  the  learning  occurs  in  an  unstructured  way  such  as  meeting,  all
way  conversations  and  e-mails  etc.  A  blended  program  design  may  look
to  capture  active  conversation  and  documents  from  unstructured  learning
events into knowledge repositories available on demand, supporting the way
knowledge-  workers  collaborate  and  work.
X Blending  Custom  content  with  off-the-shelf    Content
Off-the-shelf content is by definition generic-unaware of your organization’s
context  and  requirements.  However  the  generic  content  is  less  expensive
to buy and frequently has higher production values than custom content you
build  yourself.  Generic,  self-paced  content  can  be  customized  today  with
the  blend  of  live  experiences  (classroom  or  online)  or  through  content
customization.  Industry  standards  like  SCORM  (Shareable  Courseware
Object Reference Model) opened the door for more flexibility in blending
off-the-shelf  and  custom  content  –improving  user  experiences.
X Blending  Learning  and  Work
Ultimately,  the  true  success  and  effectiveness  of  learning  in  organization
17
Sharma  and  Rawat
is  believed  to  be  associated  with  the  paradigm  where  work  and  learning
are  inseparable,  and  where  learning  in  embedded  in  such  a  way  that  work
becomes  a  source  of  learning    content  to  be  shared  and  more  learning
content  becomes  accessible  on  demand  and  in  the  context  of  the  user’
workplace  need.
X Categories  of  Blended  Learning  Systems
There  are  three  categories  of  blended  learning  programs  as  follows:
X Enabling  Blends:    Primarily  focus  on  issue  of  access  and  convenience–
for  example,  blends  that  are  intended  to  provide  additional  flexibility  to
learners or blends that attempt to provide the same opportunity or learning
experience  but  through  a  different  modality.
X Enhancing  Blends:    Allow  incremental  changes  to  the  pedagogy  but  do
not  radically  change  the  way  teaching  and  learning  occur. This  can  occurs
at  both  the  ends  of  the  spectrum.
X Transforming  Blends:  Blends  that  allows  an  essential  transformation  of
pedagogy–  for  example,  a  change  from  a  model  where  learners  are  just
receivers  of  information  to  model  where  learners  actively  constructed
knowledge  through  dynamic  interactions.  These  types  of  blends  enable
intellectual activity that was not practically possible without the technology.
There are many benefits of blended learning as learner can participate any time
mean flexible classroom scheduling. Students become able to use many learning
resources  on  line  and  offline  at  their  own.  They  can  share  knowledge  with
instructor  also.  A  blended  learning  approach  can  make  teaching  easier  and
making  learning  more  effective.
(3) Latest  Blended  Technologies
Blended technologies are already being used in education world. With the advent
of  e-learning  and  electronic  and  telecommunication  technology  educational
innovations  have  become  daily  affair.  Modern  Mobile  telephony  has  increased
the power of learning many fold and latest trends of learning are moving towards
social  learning  environment.  Concept  of  Blended  learning  is  one  of  them  and
next section discusses some prominent of it under two major categories namely
Personalised  technologies  and  collaborated  technologies:-
X Personalized  Technologies
Personalised technologies are completely learner-centric technologies which take
care  of  individual  learner’s  learning  objective  by  providing  him  opportunities
of learning at self-pace, convenience, mobility many times and any time
accessibility.
18
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
X Gamification
e-Learning  courses  of  the  future  will  likely  resemble  an  interactive
videogame rather  than  a  traditional  lecture.  Gamification  techniques  strive  to
leverage people’s natural desires for socializing, learning, mastery, competition,
achievement,  status,  self-expression, altruism  or  closure.  It  is  the  use  of  game
thinking and game mechanics in a non-game context to engage users and solve
problems. Candy Crush and World of Warcraft have taught us a lot about the
cognitive  psychology  behind  engagement.  Learners  like  games.  They  like
challenges,  interactive  elements,  and  opportunities  to  develop  strategies.  They
also  like  mastering  concepts  levelling  up,  immediate  feedback,  and  characters
with distinct personalities. Great courses of the future will likely include many of
these elements which will make the learning experience so exciting, interactive,
and fun that learners can’t wait to participate and reap the benefits by mastering the
content. (“e-Learning Future: What Will e-Learning Look Like in 2075?”, n.d.).
X Virtual  Technologies
In the 1990’s and early 2000’s, IMAX and 3D movies gave viewers a somewhat
realistic experience. However, futuristic virtual reality technologies could
actually  put  learners  in  the  role  of  discoverer,  astronaut,  historical  figure,
businessman,  etc.  Technologies  like  Google  Glass  and  other  wearable  tech
devices  might  become  so  readily  available  that  they  can  permeate  throughout
learning institutions. Sometimes called “immersive multimedia” the
possibilities  of  virtual  reality  are  endless,  because  if  you  can  imagine  it,  you
could  virtually  design  it,  interact  with  it,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  learning
experience. CAD software and multimodal devices are advancing rapidly, and so
a futuristic learning experience could incorporate recreated sensory experiences
including  virtual  taste,  smell,  sound,  touch,  and  visuals  (“e-Learning  Future:
What  Will  e-Learning  Look  Like  in  2075”,  n.d.)
X Mobile-learning
Mobile learning is the most popular form of e-learning. It is purely personalized
form  of  learning  which  is  completely  learner-centric.  Mobile  learning  is  the
most  personalized  form  of  learning  as  it  focuses  on  each  and  every  learner’s
learning  needs  fulfilling  every  learner’s  learning  objectives  separately.  It  gives
learner  tremendous  ease  of  learning  with  features  of  mobile  learning,  instant
accessibility of information, informal user-convenient environment of learning,
instant  feedbacks,  storage  and  reusability  of  content  and  global  information
sharing  from  anywhere  in  the  world.  Mobile  learning  has  enhanced  upon
e-learning  by  taking  it  a  step  further  and  allowing  students  to  learn  virtually
anywhere  a  mobile  signal  is  available.  Some  examples  of  mobile Applications
useful  for  learner’s  are  as  follows:
19
Sharma  and  Rawat
X Flashnotes
Flashnotes  allows  students  to  upload  their  lecture  notes  and  sell  them  to  other
students  who  need  more  help  or  resources.  The  rating  system  allows  the  best
note  takers  to  get  more  business  and  the  general  pool  of  knowledge  expands
as  students  continue  to  share  their  work  with  one  another.
X Study  Blue
This  is  an  app  that  allows  students  to  organize  their  coursework,  store  notes
and flashcards, and share their materials with other students. Here smartphones
becomes  primary  source  for  study  materials.
X Snagit,  Jing,  Camtasia
These screen capture video software programs are making it easy for instructors
to  give  online  tutorials.  Tech  Smith  offers  a  host  of  different  products  from a
free screen capture to professional quality videos. He can record narration while
capturing the screen shots as he demonstrates the action. This feature can also be
used for teachers who are correcting a paper or demonstrating a math problem.
X Glogster  EDU
Similar  to  blogs  Glogster  users  can  creatively  display  their  research  and  work.
Glogster  allows  students  to  collage  pictures,  text,  video,  and  custom  graphics
to  create  a  visually  appealing  presentation  for  their  latest  project.  The  Glogs
are  easy  to  make  and  share  all  types  of  resources.
X Live  Binders
Using  the  same  idea  as  pinning  and  bookmarking,  the  binder  allows  educators
to  collect  and  organize  resources  for  lesson  plans.  The  Live  Binder  can  also
work  for  students  who  are  amassing  resources  for  a  big  project.
X Knewton
This new technology company aims at personalizing content for optimal
learning. The  platform  monitors  the  student’s  activity  and  uses  the  information
to  give  the  student  the  best  personalized  resources  based  on  their  level  of
performance. The technology also boasts integration among different disciplines
creating  a  more  comprehensive  set  of  resources  that  interact  with  one  another.
Knewton  grows  more  intuitive  the  more  the  student  uses  the  software.  It  can
follow  a  student  through  their  entire  education  career.
X Podcasting
As  described  by  Clark  &Westcott  Podcasting consists  of  listening  to  audio
recordings of lectures used to review live lectures and to provide opportunities
for  students  to  rehearse  oral  presentations.  Further  McGarr,  Steven  &  Teasley
suggested about Podcasts that they may also provide supplemental information
20
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
to  enhance  traditional  lectures.  As  suggested  by  Psychological  research  of
Callaway  &  Ewen  University  students  who  download  podcast  lectures  achieve
substantially  higher  exam  results  than  those  who  attend  the  lecture  in  person,
only  in  cases  in  which  students take  notes(  as  cited  in  “M-learning”,  n.d.)
X Collaborative  Techniques
Collaborative  techniques  as  the  name  suggests  are  the  latest  technologies  and
are  truly  harnessing  the  power  of  blended  learning  for  learner’s  benefits  to  the
maximum.  Before  discussing  collaborated  techniques  we  have  to  understand
u-learning. Whenever we talk about collaborated learning, it simply means that
we  are  talking  about  ubiquitous  learning. Without  taking  concept  of  u-learning
we  can’t  complete  our  discussion  about  blended  learning.
Ubiquitous  learning:  u-learning
According to Chang, & Sheu, (2002) Ubiquitous learning or u-learning is a new
learning paradigm. It is said to be an expansion of previous learning paradigms
as  we  move  from  conventional  learning  to  electronic-learning  (e-learning)  and
from  e-learning  to  mobile-learning  (m-learning)  and  now  we  are  shifting  to
u-learning.  The  ubiquitous  learning  environment  provides  an  interoperable,
pervasive,  and  seamless  learning  architecture  to  connect,  integrate,  and  share
three  major  dimensions  of  learning  resources:  learning  collaborators,  learning
contents, and learning services (Cheng, et.al., 2005; Haruo, et.al., 2003). Ubiqui-
tous  learning  is  characterized  by  providing  intuitive  ways  for  identifying  right
collaborators, right contents and right services in the right place at the right time
based  on  learners  surrounding  context  such  as  where  and  when  the  learners
are  in  terms  of  time  and  space  (as  cited  in Yahya, Arniza Ahmad  & Abd  Jalil,
2010)
Some  of  the  major  newest  names  of  collaborative  techniques  are:
X Flipped  classrooms
The  flipped  classroom  is  a  pedagogical  model  in  which  the  typical  lecture  and
homework  elements  of  a  course  are  reversed.  Short  video  lectures  are  viewed
by  students  at  home  before  the  class  session,  while  in-class  time  is  devoted  to
exercises,  projects,  or  discussions.  The  video  lecture  is  often  seen  as  the  key
ingredient  in  the  flipped  approach,  such  lectures  being  either  created  by  the
instructor and posted online or selected from an online repository. While a pre-
recorded  lecture  could  certainly  be  a  podcast  or  other  audio  format,  the  ease
with which video can be accessed and viewed today has made it so ubiquitous
that the flipped model has come to be identified with it. The notion of a flipped
classroom draws on such concepts as active learning, student engagement, hybrid
course  design,  and  course  podcasting.  The  value  of  a  flipped  class  is  in  the
21
Sharma  and  Rawat
repurposing  of  class  time  into  a  workshop  where  students  can  inquire  about
lecture  content,  test  their  skills  in  applying  knowledge,  and  interact  with  one
another  in  hands-on  activities.  During  class  sessions,  instructors  function  as
coaches or advisors, encouraging students in individual inquiry and collaborative
effort  (“Things  You  Should  Know  About...Flipped  Classrooms”,  2012).
X MOOC  (Massive  Open  Online  Course)
A massive open online course is an online course aimed at unlimited
participation  and  open  access  via  the  web.  In  addition  to  traditional  course
materials  such  as  filmed  lectures,  readings,  and problem  sets,  many  MOOCs
provide  interactive  user  forums  to  support  community  interactions  between
students,  professors,  and teaching  assistants (TAs).  MOOCs  are  a  recent  and
widely researched development in distance education which was first introduced
in  2008  and  emerged  as  a  popular  mode  of  learning  in  2012.  (“Massive  Open
Online Course”, n.d.). MOOCs allow millions of people to take the same course
at  once  from  just  about  anywhere  in  the  world.  Someone  may  be  in Australia
chatting with their classmate in Canada in real-time. Online courses and MOOCs
are similar in a lot of ways. The one main difference between them is interaction.
Online courses are not interactive and they involve a single learner, almost at all
times. On the flip side, MOOCs are very interactive involving a pool of learners,
learning at the same time. The interaction is very useful for clearing doubts and
sharing ideas. (“e-Learning Future: What Will eLearning Look Like in 2075?”,
n.d.)
X Learning  Management  System  (LMS)
A learning management system (LMS) is a software application for the adminis-
tration, documentation, tracking, reporting and delivery of electronic educational
technology (= also called e-learning) courses or training programs. Most LMSs
are  web-based  to  facilitate  access  to  learning  content  and  administration. They
are  also  used  by  educational  institutions  to  enhance  and  support  classroom
teaching and offering courses to a larger population of learners. LMSs are used
by  regulated  industries  (e.g.  financial  services  and  biopharma)  for compliance
training.  Student  self-service  (e.g.,  self-registration  on  instructor-led  training),
training  workflow  (e.g.,  user  notification,  manager  approval,  wait-list  manage-
ment),  the  provision  of  on-line  learning  (e.g.,  computer,  read  &  understand),
on-line  assessment,  management  of  continuous  professional  education  (CPE),
collaborative learning (e.g., application sharing, discussion threads), and training
resource management (e.g., instructors, facilities, equipment), are all-important
dimensions of learning management systems. (“Learning Management System”,
n.d.)

Conclusion
Learning needs are intrinsic to all human beings. To make this teaching-learning
qualitative  it  is  essential  to  improve  and  ultimately  merge  various  factors
involved  in  learning.  Blended  learning  is  one  such  solution  which  creates  a
complete  environment  making  teaching-learning  process  highly  conducive.  It
is an integrated holistic teaching-learning approach to create a learning environ-
ment  that  either  combines  teaching  method,  delivery  methods,  media  formats
or a mixture of all these. The BL is an umbrella concept for present and future
trends  of  learning-teaching  as  it  is  just  not  learner-centric  but  also  teacher-
centric. It is that solution which defines teacher’s role clearly while facilitating
learner’s  needs.  It  is  apt  to  conclude  that  it  is  an  ultimate  solution  bridging
modern technological teaching and traditional methods for achieving qualitative
goals  of  learning.
References
Defining  e-learning.  (n.d.).  Retrieved  December  8,  2010  from  http://www.nwlink.com/
~donclark/hrd/elearning/define.html.
E-Learning Future: What will eLearning look like in 2075? (n.d.). Retrieved from http:
//elearningindustry.com/elearning-future-what-will-elearning-look-like-2075.
Gagne R., (1985). The condition of learning (4th ed.) New York, Holt Rinehart & Winston,
pp.  263-276.
Howard Community College’s teaching resources. Idea on cooperative learning and use
of  small  groups.  (Online)  15  October  2001.  http://www.howardcc.edu/profdev/
resources/learning/groups1.htm
Internet. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved October 18, 2015 from https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Internet
Khandai  H.,  &  Khan  Shabnam  (2011).  Advance  educational  technology.  New  Delhi,
APH  Publishing  House.  pp.  41-62
Learning  Management  System.  (n.d.).  In  Wikipedia.  Retrieved  7  October  2015  from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_management_system
Massive  Open  Online  Course.(n.d.).  In  Wikipedia.  Retrieved  October  16,  2015  from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_open_online_course
Mayer E. Richard. (2005). The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning. Cambridge
University  Press.
“M-learning”. (n.d.). Wikipedia Retrieved November 2, 2015 from https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/M-learning
M-learning. (2015). In Wikipedia. Retrieved 10 October, 2015 from https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/M-learning
Mobile  Learning.  (2015).  UNESCO:ICT  in  Education  Retrieved  from  http://www.
unesco.org/new/en/unesco/themes/icts/m4ed/
23
Sharma  and  Rawat
Rao Aditi. (2012). 10 Educational Technology Quotes. [Web blog]. Retrieved from http:/
/teachbytes.com/2012/03/01/10-educational-technology-quotes/
Siddhiqui  M.H.,  (2014).  Educational  Technology.  New  Delhi, APH  Publishing  House.
pp.  41-62.
Things  you  should  know  about  Flipped  Classrooms.  (2012).  Educause.  Retrieved
February  2012  from  https://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/eli7081.pdf
Thiyagu K., & Muthuchamy I., (2011). Technology and teaching Learning skills. Delhi,
Kalpaz  Publication.  pp.  251-258.
Yahya  Saadiah, Arniza Ahmad  Erny  & Abd  Jalil  Kamarularifin.  (2010). The  definition
and characteristics of ubiquitous learning: A discussion. International Journal of
Education and Development using Information and Communication Technology.
(IJEDICT),  2010,  Vol.  6,  Issue  1,  pp.  117-127  Retrieved  from  http://ijedict.dec.
uwi.edu/include/getdoc.php?id=4843.
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research,
Volume-V,  March  2016,  Pp.  24-37
ISSN  2277-3819
©  University  of  Calcutta
* Research  Scholar,  Department    of  Education,  University  of  Calcutta
Cultural  Diversity:  A  Challenge  in  21st  Century  School
Curriculum  of  India
Piyali  Ghosh*
Abstract
This  paper  is  concerned  with  cultural  diversity  as  a  challenge  to  form  school
curriculum in India. It examined the influence of multi-culturism on curriculum
development  in  Indians  School.  Education  is  regarded  as  the  transmission  of
culture in a process known as enculturation. It is a process of initiating the growing
and inexperienced persons into the way of life in his society based on factors of
culture. The school does not work in a vacuum, but has to operate in co-operation
with the home, and all other socio-political forces that influence the development
of the child. One of the primary tasks of the teacher is to use the culture and school
curriculum  in  helping  pupils  to  make  satisfactory  adjustments  with  the  help  of
curriculum  components  and  programs  designed. This  paper  was  concerned  with
the  question  whether  curriculum  in  the  school  is  in  any  way  based  on  culture.
Has curriculum any connection with culture of the society? Can social, political,
psychological  dimensions  of  curriculum  in  terms  of  educational  aims  bring
desirable  cultural  values  among  the  learners? This  task  is  impossible  unless  the
school teachers initiate to inculcate appropriate outlook among the students. The
paper  therefore  dealt  with  the  meaning  of  culture;  its  relation  with  curriculum
development; influence of socio-political forces and culture on children’s
development  to  fulfill  educational  aims.
Key  words:  Influence,  muli-culture,  cultural  diversity,  socio-political  forces,
curriculum  development.
Introduction
Culture  is  a  complex  whole  which  includes  knowledge,  beliefs,  arts,  morals,
customs and any other capabilities acquired by man as a member of the society.
It  is  the  sum  total  of  a  given  society’s  way  of  life  moulded  and  shaped  by
prevailing  circumstances  and  environment  (Brown,  1990).  This  implies  that
culture  is  not  static  but  dynamic  and  it  responds  to  external  influences,  which
bring about changes and influences curriculum development in schools.  Culture
includes  intellectual  and  socio-political  aspects  of  human  beings.  It  also  takes
account of the aesthetic instinct as well as the spiritual impulses of human being.
25
Ghosh
It  has  also  an  appeal  to  the  subconscious  as  a  force  making  for  the  formation
of  character.
India  is  a  vast  country  with  a  lot  of  diversity  in  her  physical  and  social
environment. But within all these diversities there is an underlying unity which
acts  as  a  cementing  force.  Diverse  cultural  practices  should  also  be  looked  at
as resources. An understanding of these practices would help teachers not only
in  understanding  how  to  relate  to  the  learners’  perspective  of  the  social  and
physical  world  around  them,  but  also  in  building  diverse  perspectives  and  in
developing  a  respect  for  plurality.
In India, curriculum development in the schools is greatly influenced by the
culture  of  the  nation.  Curriculum  was  originally  defined  as  a  cost  of  study  or
training  and  a  product.  (Wiles  and  Bondy,  1979).  It  is  a  sequence  of  potential
experiences  set  up  in  the  school  for  the  purpose  of  discipline  of  children  and
youths  in  various  activities.  In  fact,  education  is  seen  as  the  transmission  of
culture  from  one  generation  to  another  known  as  enculturation.  Enculturation
is the process of initiating the growing and inexperienced person into the way of
life of his society. Enculturation is similar to socialization, but more embracing
that  it,  as  it  influences  curriculum  in  the  school  system.  The  school  is  a
formalized  and  systematized  institution,  built  in  the  society  for  the  society.
Therefore, the school is a specific, local and a dynamic institution in the society;
and  curriculum is generally considered to be all of the experiences that learners
have  under  the  roof  of  the  school. At  school  level,  what  is  generally  regarded
as the curriculum is the syllabus, which contains a list of subjects taught in the
school.  The  syllabus  is  primarily  concerned  with  the  exploration  of  culture.  It
was this emphasis of the syllabus on culture that made earlier curriculum workers
believe  that  the  school  was  built  basically  to  “transmit  the  cultural  heritage”
which implies accumulated human experiences (Jenkins, 1974). Since the paper
is  mainly  concerned  with  cultural  basis  of  curriculum,  it  questions  whether
culture  is  in  any  way  connected  with  currriculum  including  its  socio-political,
psychological  and  philosophical  dimensions.  It  will  also  embrace  the  issue  of
cultural relativism in diverse cultural society like India and intend to suggest the
universal  criteria  to  decide  educational  aims  to  build  a  desirable  society.
What  is  Culture
The term culture actually came into use during the middle ages. It derived from
the  Latin  word  for  cultivation.  Culture  is  the  way  of  life  of  a  social  group  and
it includes actions, values and beliefs that can be communicated with necessary
modifications  from  one  generation  to  the  succeeding  one.  Culture  varies  from
one society to another and even within the same group of people depending on
the period. This means that culture is not static but dynamic and it is expressed
26
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
in  terms  of  human  behaviours,  shared  among  a  people  and  it  is  learnt  rather
than  inherited.  Therefore,  the  fundamental  aspects  of  culture  as  it  influences
curriculum  in  the  school  system  in  India  include  belief,  values,  and  customs.
Culture  is  practiced  by  a  whole  group  of  people  from  generation  to  generation
(Bhaba,  1990).  Culture  is  maintained  or  modified  through  education  by  way
of  curriculum  development.
What  is  Curriculum
The  word  curriculum  has  a  Latin  origin  “currus”  which  means  “course”  and
by  the  19th  century,  the  word  curriculum  had  come  to  be  used  in  reference
to  education.  Curriculum  is  now  taken  as  a  course  which  students  or  pupils
undertake  as  they  compete  for  their  academic  works.  The  term  “curriculum”
is  an  organized  instruction.
Aspects  of  Culture  in  Curriculum  Development
The fundamental aspects of culture include beliefs, values, routines and customs
(Itedjere,  1993).
Beliefs:  Every  culture  has  some  beliefs  which  are  accepted  as  true.  These
beliefs are valued and so are accepted by majority of people in the community.
Values: Values are those aspects of cultural practices, actions or objects that
are  valued  in  high  esteem  in  the  society.  The  values  of  a  society  are  also
those  aspects  of  the  culture  that  society  wants  to  preserve  because  their
traditionally  valued  and  they  want  to  pass  it  from  generation  to  generation.
Values  and  judgments  are  not  only  important  elements  of  culture  but  they
are  also  relevant  to  modern  society.
Routines  and  customs:  Routines  and  customs  are  also  very  important  aspects
of  culture.  Ezewu  (1983)  explained  that  three  concept  are  interrelated-recipes,
routines  and  customs.  Routines  and  customs  refer  to  the  actual  doings  and  the
regularities of those cultural actions or elements. Customs serve as recipes and
routines to which people regularly resort for recurring purposes (Ezewu, 1983).
Influenence  of  Family  Culture  on  Curriculum  and  its  Development
The family is still the main institution affecting the life and growth of the child.
The  family  exerts  significant  influence  on  the  social,  emotional  and  moral
development of the child. His personality and values are affected by the family.
In  planning  any  relevant  curriculum  for  the  learners,  the  planner  should  be
familiar  with  the  family  and  home  conditions  of  the  learner.  The  intellectual
climate  of  the  home  and  attitudes  of  the  parents  towards  education  affects  the
individual’s  behaviour  and  accomplishment  in  schools.  A  study  of  the  family
at  close  range  reveals  much  information  for  a  more  complete  and  sympathetic
27
Ghosh
understanding of children. The Indian family is changing in its size, its stability,
its  mobility,  and  its  culture.  Several  factors  are  causing  these  changes  and  are
putting more pressures on children and youth. One factor is the rapid
urbanization of our society, which takes children from a simpler rural situation
into  a  more  tense  and  complex  urban  style  of  living.
Cultural  Determinants  of  the  Content  of  Curriculum  in  Schools  of  India
Okeke  (1991)  sees  education  as  the  process  by  which  society  deliberately
transmit  its  cultural  heritage  through  schools.  This  means  that  the  content  of
the curriculum in schools must be loaded with cultural elements of the society.
Since educational system is supposed to be a reflection of the society’s culture,
needs and aspirations, the nature of the knowledge available in any given society
should  be  sought  in  the  nature  of  a  society’s  institutions  and  culture.  Katoke
(1982) asserts that it is essential that any kind of educational policy and planning
which is a key to development or an eye opener to the learner’s self awareness
and  that  of  his  surroundings  make  culture  its  base  .  Okeke  (1991)  asserts  that
“aspects of society’s culture are not found adequate for the survival and progress
of  society.  It  is  the  culture  of  the  society  that  should  determine  the  knowledge
in  the  school  curriculum.  According  to  Ezewu  (1987),  culture  is  made  up  of
speech, material traits, arts, mythology, scientific knowledge, religious practices,
family and social practices, real and personal property has a corresponding body
of knowledge packaged in the components of the school curriculum. The content
of  education  includes  those  forms  of  knowledge,  skills,  values  and  attitudes
which  motivate  and  control  conduct  of  children  in  the  school  community.
As  curriculum  is  based  on  culture  or  as  curriculum  would be  shaped  by  the
culture of the society in which it operates, the content should enable the young
citizens to conform with the expectations of the groups in everyday life
(Herzfeld,  1997).
India  is  a  multicultural  society  made  up  of  numerous  regional  and  local
cultures. People’s religious beliefs, ways of life and their understanding of social
relationships are quite distinct from one another. All the groups have equal rights
to  co-exist  and  flourish,  and  the  education  system  needs  to  respond  to  the
cultural  pluralism  inherent  in  our  society.  To  strengthen  our  cultural  heritage
and  national  identity,  the  curriculum  should  enable  the  younger  generation  to
reinterpret and re-evaluate the past with reference to new priorities and emerging
outlooks of a changing societal context. Understanding human evolution should
make it clear that the existence of distinctness in our country is a tribute to the
special spirit of our country, which allowed it to flourish. The cultural diversity
of this land should continue to be treasured as our special attribute. This should
not  be  considered  a  result  of  mere  tolerance.  Creation  of  a  citizenry  conscious

of  their  rights  and  duties,  and  commitment  to  the  principles  embodied  in  our
Constitution  is  a  prerequisite.
Challenges Faced to Establish Universal Criteria to Fulfil Aims of Education
It  is  in  this  context  that  the  reconstituted  CABE’s  Committee  of  ‘Integration
of  Culture  Education  in  the  School  Curriculum’  was  given  the  rather  broad
mandate: to look into the ‘what’, the ‘why’ and the ‘how’ of inculcating cultural
values  through  the  School  Curriculum.
The  challenges  faced  by  the  curriculum  developers  are
a)  To  suggest  ways  of  enhancing  the  quality  of  cultural  awareness  among
school  going  children.
b)  To  suggest  ways  of  introducing  both  in  curricular  and  extra  curricular
ways, the learning of our traditional, folk, classical and contemporary art
forms
c) To  suggest  ways  of  helping  the  students  to  appreciate  the  world  of  arts,
music  and  literature
Suggestions  to  Minimize  Tension  in  Culturally  Diverse  Society
The author’s suggestions for improving the quality of cultural awareness, would,
therefore,  include:
O The  entire  schooling  should  be  based  on  the  culture  of  the  locality/
community.  Learning  should  be  made  ‘culture  sensitive’
O The  school  curriculum  should  be  process  based,  and  experiential,  with
sufficient flexibility to integrate local culture. The curriculum should have
sufficient  flexibility  to  accommodate  the  hopes,  aspirations,  needs  and
culture  of  the  local  community.
O Conscious  efforts  should  be  made  to  ensure  that  the  Teaching-Learning
process  does  not  become  culturally  sterile:  consciously  or  unconsciously
promoting  one  particular  culture/sub-culture.
O The  teacher  should  become  a  friend  and  facilitator  encouraging  different
cultural  patterns  and  processes.
O The Teaching-Learning  process  should  make  use  of  a  variety  of  ‘mother-
tongues’, dialects and other local languages. The Teaching-Learning
process should make the best use of the diversity of local challenges. What
is  relevant  from  the  cultural  point  of  view  is  that  the  teacher  should  be
carefully guided to acquire attitudes, understanding and skills for utilizing
the  cultural  and  language  diversity  creatively  (through  even  multi-lingual
learning  activities  including  drama,  music  and  so  on).
O For  the  pre-primary  and  elementary  stage  of  school  education  the  mother
29
Ghosh
tongue  shall  be  the  medium  of  instruction  so  that  children  do  not  feel
‘threatened’  by  an  alien  language  thrust  upon  them.
O The  ‘terrain  of  culture’  should  have  sufficient  free  space  for  all  local
languages  and  dialects.
O The school Parent Teacher Associations and Village Education Committees
could  be  encouraged  to  get  actively  involved  in  providing  support  to
teachers  for  accessing  and  utilizing  local  ‘cultural’  resources  both  human
and  material.
O The  school  calendar  should  have  at  least  two  periods  a  week  set  apart
exclusively  for  cultural  activities.
O The  school  library  should  be  the  nodal  point  for  all  ‘cultural’  learning
in the  school.
O Children’s  camps  could  be  organized  during  vacations  where  ‘cultural’
activities  could  be  freely  explored  in  a  non-threatening  atmosphere.
O A new ‘Common School System’ should be designed and implemented, one
that  would  bridge  the  cultural  barriers  by  bringing  all  students  together
irrespective of caste, creed, location or sex, to have access to education of
comparable quality. This would be one important approach to the integration
of  cultural  values  into  school  education.
Teacher’s  Role  in  Dealing  with  Cultural  Diversities  in  Curriculum
School  practice  is  an  integral  and  perhaps  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of
education.  It  is  guided  by  the  philosophy  and  perspectives  of  the  teacher,  the
curriculum and material developer, the educational administrator, and the
community.
Three kinds of curricula are routinely present in the classroom, each of which
offers  different  opportunities  for  teaching  cultural  diversity.  The  first  is  formal
plans for instruction approved by the policy and governing bodies of educational
systems. They are usually anchored in and complemented by adopted textbooks
and  other  curriculum  guidelines  such  as  the  “standards”  issued  by  national
commissions, state departments of education, professional associations, and local
school  districts.  Even  though  these  curriculum  documents  have  improved  over
time in their treatment of ethnic and cultural diversity, they are still not as good
as  they  need  to  be  (Wade,  1993).  Culturally  responsive  teachers  know  how  to
determine the multicultural strengths and weaknesses of curriculum designs and
instructional materials and make the changes necessary to improve their overall
quality.  These  analyses  should  focus  on  the  quantity,  accuracy,  complexity,
placement, purpose, variety, significance, and authenticity of the narrative texts,
visual  illustrations,  learning  activities,  role  models,  and  authorial  sources  used
30
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
in the instructional materials Culturally responsive teaching reverses the trends
by dealing directly with controversy; studying a wide range of ethnic individuals
and groups; contextualizing issues within race, class, ethnicity, and gender; and
including multiple kinds of knowledge and perspectives. It also recognizes that
these  broad-based  analyses  are  necessary to  do  instructional  justice  to  the
complexity,  vitality,  and  potentiality  of  ethnic  and  cultural  diversity.  Teachers
need to thoroughly understand existing obstacles to culturally responsive
teaching  before  they  can  successfully  remove  them.
Other  instructional  plans  used  frequently  in  schools  are  called  the  symbolic
curriculum (Gay, 1995). They include images, symbols, icons, mottoes, awards,
celebrations, and other artifacts that are used to teach students knowledge, skills,
morals, and values. The most common forms of symbolic curricula are bulletin
board  decorations;  images  of  heroes  and  heroines;  trade  books;  and  publicly
displayed statements of social etiquette, rules and regulations, ethical principles,
and tokens of achievement. Therefore, classroom and school walls are valuable
“advertising” space, and students learn important lessons from what is displayed
there. Over time, they come to expect certain images, value what is present, and
devalue that which is absent. Culturally responsive teachers are critically
conscious of the power of the symbolic curriculum as an instrument of teaching
and use it to help convey important information, values, and actions about ethnic
and  cultural  diversity.  They  ensure  that  the  images  displayed  in  classrooms
represent a wide variety of age, gender, time, place, social class, and positional
diversity  within  and  across  ethnic  groups  and  that  they  are  accurate  extensions
of what is taught through the formal curriculum. Teachers have to care so much
about ethnically diverse students and their achievement that they accept nothing
less  than  high-level  success  from  them  and  work  diligently  to  accomplish  it
(Foster,  1997;  Kleinfeld,  1974,  1975).  Building  community  among  diverse
learners  is  another  essential  element  of  culturally  responsive  teaching.  The
process  of  building  culturally  responsive  communities  of  learning  is  important
for  teachers  to  know  as  well. The  emphasis  should  be  on  holistic  or  integrated
learning. Personal, moral, social, political, cultural, and academic knowledge and
skills are taught simultaneously. For example, students are taught their cultural
heritages  and  positive  ethnic  identity  development  along  with  math,  science,
reading,  critical  thinking,  and  social  activism.  They  also  are  taught  about  the
heritages, cultures, and contributions of other ethnic groups as they are learning
their  own.  Culturally  responsive  teachers  help  students  to  understand  that
knowledge  has  moral  and  political  elements  and  consequences,  which  obligate
them to take social action to promote freedom, equality, and justice for every one.
Effective cross-cultural communication is a fourth pivotal element of
preparing for culturally responsive teaching. Porter and Samovar (1991)
31
Ghosh
explained  that  culture  influences  “what  we  talk  about;  how  we  talk  about  it;
what  we  see,  attend  to,  or  ignore;  how  we  think;  and  what  we  think  about”
(p.  21).  Montagu  and Watson  (1979)  added  that  communication  is  the  “ground
of  meeting  and  the  foundation  of  community”  (p.  vii)  among  human  beings.
Without this “meeting” and “community” in the classroom, learning is difficult
to  accomplish  for  some  students.
How  to  Overcome  Interference  of  Political  Ideology  in  Curriculum
Education is and always has been a contested terrain. It is shaped by the politics
of  the  day.  The  educated  Indian  middle  class,  however,  naively  believes  that
politics,  in  principle,  does  not  and  in  practice  should  not,  influence  school
practice. This  happens  because  politics  is  often  considered  dirty  and  polluting.
But  the  reality  is  that  politics  shapes  society  to  a  large  extent,  both  positively
and negatively. For example, the democratic Constitution that we gave ourselves
at  the  end  of  the  freedom  movement  was  born  out  of  the  political  struggle  for
freedom. This struggle continued in the political struggle for the equality of all.
It  is  the  politics  of  equity  that  has  shaped  the  granting  of  various  rights–the
rights  that  we  take  for  granted  today–through  legal  provisioning. This  struggle
in some senses ‘disrupted’ and still disrupts ‘normal’ life. However, participation
and  leadership  of  such  struggles  can  also  be  seen  as  a  learning  opportunity
in  which  children  and  teachers  can  engage.
Philosophies  and  perspectives,  as  they  are,  are  formed  by  cultural  and
political  thought  of  the  times.  If  political  power  is  not  acceptable  directly  in
curriculum  what  should  be  done?
Two remedies are called for if we wish an end to Independent India’s political
interference  in  curriculum  framing  at  school:  (1)  Nurturing  a  respect  for  all
academic stands and calling for civilized national debates free from
demonization;  (2)  Lessening  the  dependence  on  textbooks:  they  are  not  just
biased,  but  too  often,  uninspiring  and  outdated.  We  must  move  away  from
textbooks, fearlessly discuss multiple viewpoints and perspectives, and
encourage  innovative  pedagogies,  for  instance  engaging  students  in  field  visits
or  mini-research  projects  to  try  and  make  history  come  alive.
For  example,  regional  history–beginning  with  the  local  fort,  an  old  temple
and  its  inscriptions,  the  village’s  hero  stone,  perhaps  a  stone  circle,  local  craft
traditions  or  some  heritage  site–should  run  in  a  stream  parallel  to  national
history:  students  will  relate  to  it  more  intimately  and  will  therefore  take  much
more  interest  in  it.
Education  can  work  towards  transforming  society  or  towards  maintaining
the status quo–it can be either transformative or conserving. It depends on what
32
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
is  the  political  philosophy  of  those  that  impact  education.  The  teachers  or
educationists, need to understand the political philosophy of the stands they take
on curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment issues, and do so with consciousness
and  agency.  If  we  look  at  education  as  transformative,  we  can  look  at  political
change and its influence on classroom practice as opportunities for engagement
in  intense  learning.
Content  of  education  is  always  under  debate–there  is  usually  a  topic  on
families  and  the  family  context  often  forms  the  context  of  literature.  So  what
kind of family do we depict? What are the gender roles reflected in the context?
Does  it  give  scope  for  different  children  to  identify  with  the  content?
In an extremely hierarchical society like ours, inclusion of plurality, specially
of the marginalized, always creates a tension. If the teachers are included in the
syllabus they can planning, actually take some chapters from different, new and
old  textbooks,  whether  of  history  and  the  social  sciences,  language  or  science
on the same theme or topic. They actually do some critical and creative exercises
with  those  texts,  we  could  create  learning  opportunities  not  available  by  just
using  one  textbook  as  a  textbook,  but  with  the  creative  excution  of  teachers.
Trends  in  Curriculum  Development  
The  curriculum  field  may  be  viewed  as  a  formal  area  of  academic  inquiry,  but
as a basic human interest, its concerns are perennial. Parents and other members
of society have wondered how best to help their young ones grow and mature.
Their  response  to  this  problem  constitutes  an  unwritten  history  of  informal
curriculam  in  thought  and  action.  As  societies  became  more  formal  and  as
institutions  developed  within  them  to  meet  specialized  needs,  schools/colleges
evolved to help students grow more efficiently, to introduce them to the ways of
their society and to help them acquire an understanding of their cultural heritage.
If we recall the earlier sections, curriculum has always been and continues to
be influenced by educational philosophers, besides societal needs. In the ancient
times,  though  a  formal  curriculum  (of  the  shape  it  has  obtained  today)  did  not
exist; young people were oriented towards meeting cultural and social demands.
Depending  on  the  influence  of  educational  philosophies,  however,  curriculum-
content  for  such  orientations  varied  from  one  period  to  the  other.  Tracing  the
historical  antecedents  of  curriculum  may  give  us  a  framework  of  its  gradual
growth.  However,  for  our  immediate  purposes  we  shall  restrict  ourselves  to  an
overview of the twentieth century curriculum and a speculation of the possible
future  trends  in  curriculum  development.
Early 20th century curriculum affirmed the shift in emphasis from sectarian
education to liberal education. Traditionally, curriculum was confined to religion
33
Ghosh
–related  orientations  and  classics.  Gradually,  more  and  more  subjects  were
added  to  the  curriculum.  As  the  focus  was  on  mental  discipline,  social  needs,
student  interest  or  capabilities  were  given  little  emphasis.  Further,  during  this
period, compartmentalization and not interdisciplinary subject matter was
considered the norm. There was an unwillingness to recognize the values of arts,
music,  physical  and  vocational  education.  This  was  based  on  the  theory  that
these subjects had little mental or disciplinary value. If we pause for a moment
here and think, we shall realize that even though we offer vocational, industrial
and/or  technical  programmes  now,  there  is  a  tendency  to  consider  traditional
academic  programmes  superior  to  them.
Gradually, demands were made for curricular changes. Industrial development
led a growing number of educators to question changes, as well as the authenticity
of the traditional curriculum and its emphasis on mental discipline. This shift was
also influenced by the scientific movement in child psychology (which focused
on  the  whole  child  and  learning  theories  in  the  1900’s).
The  argument  that  classics  had  no  greater  disciplinary  or  mental  value  than
other  subjects  eventually  appeared  and  meant  that  mental  discipline  (which
emphasized drill and memorization) was no longer considered conducive for the
overall  growth  and  development  of  children.  In  essence,  societal  changes  and
the  emerging  demands  there  from;  the  stress  on  psychology  and  science;  and
the concern for social and educational reform made evident the need for a new
curriculum.  Thus,  the  aims  of  education  went  hand  in  hand  with  the  particular
type  of  society  involved:  conversely,  the  society  that  evolved  influenced  the
aims  of  education.
Thus, the early twentieth century was a period of educational reform
characterized  by  the  following:
i) Idea  of  mental  discipline  was  replaced  by  utilitarian  modes  of  thought
and  scientific  inquiry.
ii) Curriculum tended not to be compartmentalized but to be
interdisciplinary.
iii) Curriculum  tended  not  to  be  static  but  dynamic-changing  with  the
changes  in  society.
iv) Needs and interest of students came to be considered of primary
importance. And now curriculum is viewed as a science with principles
and  methodology  not  just  as  content  or  subject  matter.
Keeping in view the prevalent political, economic and academic climate, it is not
difficult  for  us  to  visualize  future  trends  and  the  influence  they  may  have  on
education,particularly  on  curriculum  development.
34
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
Although  we  have    been  underlining  the  fact  that  social  changes  will  have
a vital role in determining a curriculum. If the present day growth of information
is any indication the information flow will increase rapidly in the future. Clearly,
the  increasing  flow  of  information  negates  the  traditional  notion  of  content-
mastery. Students, therefore, will need to acquire critical thinking, and problem
solving abilities rather than static and/or absolute knowledge and skills of factual
recall.
Further,  in  the  21st  centuries,  the  need  for  change  will  accelerate.  For
example,  it  took  us  more  than  one  century  to  shift  from  an  agricultural  society
to  an  industrial  one.  But  it  took  hardly  two  decades  to  shift  from  an  industrial
to  an  information  society.
As  we  enter  the  twenty-first  century,  however,  curricula  based  on  projects,
techniques, over-simplified metaphors, and pre-made units continue to “de-skill”
(Apple  &  Christian-Smith,  1991)  teachers  and  students.  Curriculum  activities
should  help  to  generate  new  knowledge  about  everyday  life-centered  issues. I
believe curriculum represents living processes of classroom cultures that change
over time and reflect a teacher’s philosophical position and perspective (Dewey,
1938;  Grauer,  1998).  Ideas  selected  for  study  need  to  reflect  the  contextual
meanings and values associated with our ability to hold multiple interpretations
of  an  idea  simultaneously.  Dewey  (1938)  wrote  that  the  value  of  educational
experiences  can  be  understood  within  the  active  interaction  and  continuity  of
knowledge  in  society  and  within  classroom  cultures.  Educational  experiences
can  be  developed  around  personal  and  social  knowledge  across  many  different
subject  areas.
“Cultural  relativism  has  an  exclusive  cross-cultural  reference.  It  raises  the
question  of  the  validity  of  applying  the  criteria  that  sanction  the  behavior  and
guide  the  thinking  of  the  people  of  one  society  to  the  standards  of  another
(Herskovits, p. 88) within any one society. Cultural relativism does not advocate
individual  or  ethical  relativism.  
Cultural relativism, as a new way of seeing, is a necessary optic to perceive
the socio-cultural reality in today’s multicultural, world society. It is “new” in the
sense that most people tend to be socialized within an ethnocentric perspective.
Such  a  perspective  is  necessary  if  a  person  is  to  become  a  “world  citizen”–a
person  who  is  able  to  transcend  his/her  own  racial/ethnic,  gender,  cultural  and
socio-political reality and identify with humankind throughout the world, at all
levels  of  human  need.  S/he  is  a transcending person  who  is  not  limited  by  the
usual  social  boundaries,  but  whose  operating  life-principle  is  compassion–the
ability  to  take  the  role  of  the  other  in  order  to  help  remove  suffering.  This  is
the  goal  to  attain  as  a  cultural  relativist  to  become  a  world  citizen.  The  needs
35
Ghosh
of  the  21st  century  demand  nothing  less.  And  a  multicultural  approach  to
education  is  the  process  that  will  make  it  possible.
The  curriculum  must  reflect  the  world  our  students  will  inhabit.  Teaching
a 20th century curriculum in the 21st century prepares our students for a world
that  no  longer  exists.  And  it  is  the  measure  of  all  three  of  these  factors  that
results  in  a  high  level  of  technology  integration  in  our  classrooms  and  in  our
schools.

What  are  the  Standards  of  21st  Century  Curriculim?
21st  Century  Standards  include  the  followings
O Focuses  on  21st  century  skills,  content  knowledge  and  expertise.
O Builds  understanding  across  and  among  core  subjects  as  well  as  21st
century  interdisciplinary  themes.
O Emphasizes  deep  understanding  rather  than  shallow  knowledge.
O Engages  students  with  the  real  world  data,  tools,  and  experts  they  will
encounter  in  college,  on  the  job,  and  in  life—students  learn  best  when
actively  engaged  in  solving  meaningful  problems.
O Allows  for  multiple  measures  of  mastery.  21st  Century  Curriculum  &
Instruction
O Teaches  21st  century  skills  discretely  in  the  context  of  core  subjects  and
21st  century  interdisciplinary  themes.
O Focuses on providing opportunities for applying 21st century skills across
content  areas  and  for  a  competency-based  approach  to  learning.
O Enables  innovative  learning  methods  that  integrate  the  use  of  supportive
technologies,  inquiry  and  problem-based  approaches  and  higher  order
thinking  skills.
O Encourages  the  integration  of  community  resources  beyond  school  walls.
O Tolerance  and  respect
O Acceptance
O A  wider  view  than  just  their  curricula  areas
O Global  awareness
O Reflection
O Human  values
According  to  UNESCO’S  Delore’s  Commissions  Report  it  is  creating  a  shift
in  the  mind  sets  of  the  students  from  the  micro  to  the  macro,  from  individual
to  collective  goals  is  thus  imperative.  The  programmes  in  the  schools  require
laying  more  stress  on  cooperative  living,  sense  of  mutual  understanding  and
36
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
creating awareness about the interdependence of all humans in the present global
scenario  which  is  becoming  increasingly  multicultural.
Conclusion
Culture  is  maintained  or  modified  through  education  and  it  is  obvious  that
curriculum  has  a  firm  bases  on  culture  since  culture  is  substance  of  education.
Culture  is  to  education  what  current  is  to  electricity,  and  any  society  whose
curriculum  is  not  based  on  its  culture  is  in  danger  of  being  estranged  by  the
social  institution  on  which  it  should  depend  for  its  survival  and  the  cultural
heritage  of  its  welfare  is  woven  from  many  threads  of  history  and  diversity.
India is a multicultural society made up of numerous regional and local cultures.
People’s religious, political beliefs, ways of life and their understanding of social
relationships are quite distinct from one another. All the groups have equal rights
to  co-exist  and  flourish,  and  the  education  system  needs  to  respond  to  the
cultural  pluralism  inherent  in  our  society.  To  strengthen  our  cultural  heritage
and  national  identity,  the  curriculum  should  enable  the  younger  generation  to
reinterpret and re-evaluate the past with reference to new priorities and emerging
outlooks of a changing societal context.  As a result, the culture of any society
affects its curriculum. Hence, culture includes everything that can be
communicated  from  one  generation  to  its  successor.
References
Bhaba  H.K.,  (1990).  ed.  Nation  and  Narration  (London:  Routledge).
Brown  B.B.,  (1990).  Peer  Groups  and  Peer  Cultures.  In  S.  Feldman  &  G.  Elliot  (Eds)
At the Household. The Developing  Adolescent. Cambridge, M.A. Harvard
University  Press.
Chaudhuri M., (1998). ‘Advancements,  Print Media and the New Indian Woman’ Social
Action. Chaudhuri M (1998). ‘Among My Own in Another Culture:  Meeting the
Asian  Indian  Americans’  in  ed.  Thapan,  Meenakshi  Anthropological  Journeys:
Reflections  from  Fieldwork  (Orient  Longman:  New  Delhi).
Ezewu  E.E.,  (1983).  Sociology  of  Education,  London:  Longmans.
Ezewu  E.E.,  (1987).  ‘Characteristics  and  Human  Learning  in  School’.  In  E.E.  Ezewu
(Ed). Social Psychological Factors of Human Learning in school, Onitsha: Leadway
Books Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
Foster  M.,  (1997).  Black  teachers  on  teaching.  New  York:  New  Press.
Gey, G., (1995). Culturally Responsive Teaching: Theory, Research and Practice Multi-
Cultural  Education  Series.  New  York:  Teacher  College  Press.
Govt.  of  India  (1971).  Education  and  National  Development:  Report  of  the  Education
Commission 1964-66, NCERT, New Delhi. Govt. of India (1968), National Policy
on  Education–1968,  Ministry    Education,  New  Delhi.  Govt.  of  India  Herzfeld
M  (1997).  “Anthropology  and  the  Politics  of  Significance”  in  Social Analysis:
J.   Cult.  Soc.  Pract.  Iss.  41(3):  107–138.
37
Ghosh
Herzfeld M., (1997). Educational Leadership in Northern Canada: Where Cultures Collise.
Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
Hirst  P.,  (1995).  Knowledge  and  the  Curriculum.  London:  Rowtledge  and  Kegan  Paul
Publishers.
Hollins E., (1996). Culture in school learning: Revealing the deep meaning. New Jersey:
Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates.
Huge  S.,  (1976).  Designing  the  Curriculum.  London:  Open  Books  Publishing  Ltd.
Itedjere  P.O.,  (1993).  Society,  Culture  and  Education.  Warri:  Klass  publishers.
Jenkins D., (1974). Schools, Teachers and Curriculum Change. In: Shipman, M.D. inside
a  Curriculum  Project.  London.
Klenisfeld, J. (1974). Study of Culture in School. Hand Book of Research on
Multicultures.  New  York.
Montagu,  A.  &  Watson,  F.W.  (1979).  The  Human  Connection.  New  York.
Methuen.  Katoke  I  (1982).  “Culture  and  Education”.  Educafrica  8:  39-58.
Okeke  E.A.C.,  (1991).  Teaching  in  Nigeria:  A  Case  for  Professionalism,  Onitsha:
University  publishing  company.  Nakpodia  009
Oliver  A.,  (2005).  Curriculum  Improvement:  A  Guide  to  Problems,  Principles  and
Procedures,  New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company  Ltd.
Ovwata  B.B.,  (2000).  A  Modern  Sociology  of  Education.  (2nd  Ed.)  Warri,  COEWA
Publishers.  Ovwata  BB,  Oniyama  EE,
Omoraka  V.O.,  (2000).  Education  for  People.
Porter, R.E. & Samovar, L.A. (1991). Basic Principles of Intercultural Communication.
In  L.A.  Samovar  &  R.E.  Poster  (Eds.),  Intercultural  Communication: A  Reader
(6th  Ed.)
Peretomode  V.F., (1993). “Introduction to Sociology of Education. Owerri,  Totan
Publishers  Ltd.
Sarason  S.,  (1996).  Revisiting  “the  culture  of  the  school  and  the  problem  of  change.
New  York:  Teachers  College  Press.
Tyler  R.W.,  (1971).  Basic  Principles  of  Curriculum  and  Instruction.  Chicago:  The
University  of  Chicago  Press.
Wade R.C., (1993). Content analysis of social studies textbooks: A review of ten years of
research.  Theory  and  Research  in  Social  Education,  21(3),  232-256.
Wheeler  D.K.,  (1978).  Curriculum  Process,  London:  Hodder  and  Stoughton.
Wiles J., Bondy J., (1979). Curriculum Development; A Guide to Practice. London: Aben
&  Howell  with  Spenia  Needs.  Warri:  COEWA  Publishers.
Yadav  S.K.,  (2003)  ‘Ten  Years  School  Curriculum  in  India–A  Status  Study’,  NCERT.
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research,
Volume-V,  March  2016,  Pp.  38-52
ISSN  2277-3819
©  University  of  Calcutta
* Research Scholar, Institute of Developmental Studies (IDSK) Fellow, University
of  Calcutta,  Alipore  Campus,  1  Reformatory  Street,  Kolkata-700027
Email:  sanju_saha@yahoo.co.in
** Assistant Professor, Department of Education, University of Calcutta,
Alipore  Campus,  1  Reformatory  Street,  Kolkata-700027,    Ph:  +91-9051010052
Email:  santoshi_halder@yahoo.com
Critical  Analysis  on  Application  of  Multimedia  Learning
and  Design  Principles  in  Higher  Education
Sanju  Saha*  and  Santoshi  Halder**
Abstract
Phenomenal growth of technological revolution is influencing every aspect of our
life and education is not secluded from this. Ways of teaching learning is gradually
changing  its  form  from  chalk  and  talk  method  to  computer  based  learning
environment.  After proving the effectiveness of dual mode of presentation
(combining  image/text  and  sound),  multimedia  based  learning  is  dominatingour
higher  education  sector  today.  Due  to  this  situation  private  and  government
organization has been developing various multimedia based learning modules for
different education level including higher education vis-a-vis emphasizing higher
order  learning.  However  this  article  is  an  attempt  to  explore  certain  aspects  of
multimedia  based  instructional  strategies  in  order  to  make  it  economically  and
educationally useful and meaningful in terms of investments along with providing
a  theoretical  aptness  concerning  visual  and  verbal  information  process,  a  meta
analytical  overview  on  the  effectiveness  of  multimedia  instruction,  conditional
effect  of  cognitive  load  and  its  obstruction  in  teaching  learning,and  finally
providing a conception about overcoming substantial cognitive load and
developing  an  effective  instructional  module.
Keywords: Computer based instruction, Multimedia instruction, higher education,
cognitive  load.
Introduction
“I  believe  that  the  motion  picture  is  destined  to  revolutionize  our  educational
system  and  that  in  a  few  years  it  will  supplant  largely,  if  not  entirely,  the  use
of  textbooks...”
Thomas  Edison,  1922
39
Saha  and  Halder
The significance of education, predominantly higher education, has continuously
been thriving and it inhabits the center stage in progress. Nevertheless, present
growth of higher education in India gain momentously in the last two decades.
During  the  last  50  years,  scientific  and  technological  revolution  has  certainly
transformed  almost  all  part  of  the  Indian  educational  system.  As  a  result,
Universities, school, and colleges perceive a metamorphosis in their outlook. The
paramount contribution of science and technology is the invention of computer
and its multi task nature (Guemide&Benachaiba, 2012). Henceforth, every aspect
of  our  life  is  influenced  with  computer  and  education  and  teaching  learning  is
not  an  exception.  Furthermore,  revolution  of  Information  and  communication
technology (ICT) and computer based instruction (CBI) is leading to fundamental
change  of  structure,  management  and  mode  of  instruction  amidst  the  whole
educational  environment.  Consequently,  the  way  of  instructional  processes  has
shifted from conventional chalk and talk approach to computer based “multimedia
approach”  in  order  to  enhance  the  teaching  learning  process  (Huang,  2011).  In
India since past decades different educational policies has emphasized execution
of computer technology as a mode of teaching learning in higher education (NPE,
1986) accomplishing scope for refining the quality of education by opening up
a  whole  world  of  information  extending  useful  and  updated  information. After
NPE  1986  several  educational  policies  in  India  render  their  support  and  have
taken  various  initiatives  like,  CLASS  programme  (CLASS  2002),  computer
literacy  mission  etc.  The  main  objective  of  the  proposed  programme  was
antecedent  of  IT  (Information Technology)  amidst  the  school  environment  and
created model schools through computer education in order to achieve the goals
of  universalization  of  computer  literacy  among  schools  in  India.  Since  1990,
NCERT has propagated its CLASS programme, to nearly 14,000 higher
secondary schools in the country (Mallik, 2001). Apart from government MHRD
(Ministry  of  Human  Resource),  various  private  organizations  like TATA  group
claimed to have added 175,000 literates using their Computer Based Functional
Literacy (CBFL) method. Pratham Education Foundation (2012) reported that on
the  basis  of  computer  based  instruction  189  Computer  Centres  spread  across  7
states  in  India  namely  Maharashtra,  Delhi,  Uttar  Pradesh,  Rajasthan,  Gujarat,
Haryana and Punjab since its beginning serving over 1,25,000 children and youth.
Over  the  years,  various  well  known  organizations  like  International  Business
machines (IBM), Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL), Bharti Foundation,
Syntel,  Volkart  Foundation,  Lucent,  St.  Gobain,  Tata  Power,  Sir  Dorabji  Tata
Trust, Reliance Ballarpur Dist. (BILT), Sanchar and The Paul Hamlyn Foundation
has been working for improvement of the  instructional process with the help of
computer based instruction. Nevertheless, different researcher and their theories
have  recognized  the  fact  that  students  do  learn  better  form  dual  mode  of
40
Indian  Journal  of  Educational  Research
presentation  (picture  or  text  and  sound).  Based  on  this  theory  “multimedia
learning” is spreading throughout the world. In India different government and
private  organization  is  developing  different  multimedia  based  learning  module
and  using  it  in  teaching  learning.  However,  this  article  focused  on  one  basic
question, whether really enough attention is being given to the development of
instructional  content  and  whether  the  investments  in  hardware  is  economically
useful and educationally meaningful for proper utilization of multimedia based
learning. Consideration of different instructional design principles is a matter of
great  concern  for  the  educators  and  researchers  in  the  field  for  its  significant
contribution  in  teaching-learning.  Without  application  of  proper  multimedia
instruction  design  it  can  impose  heavy  cognitive  load  in  working  memory  and
learner could not avail substantial benefit from the instructions causing delirious
effect on learning and the learner (Mayer, 2001). In this point of view in this article
an  attempt  has  been  taken  by  the  researchers  to  theoretically  discuss  following
question:
How  do  visual  and  verbal  information  process?
Why  multimedia  based  instructional  module  is  more  effective  (A  Meta
analytical  overview)?
In  which  condition  multimedia  based  instructional  environment  impose
substantial cognitive load and obstructs teaching learning process
(Theoretical  justification)?
How  do  we  overcome  substantial  cognitive  load  and  develop  an  effective
instructional  module?
Importanceof  Multimedia  Learning  In  Higher  Education
Multimedia  based  learning  material  is  an  effective  tool  to  optimize  every
student’s  knowledge  according  to  its  ability  and  additionally  produce  learning
environment  more  appealing  by  supplying  excessive  flexibility.  Effectiveness
of multimedia in higher education customarily emphasizes on scholastic learning
environment where the content material is abstract (Van Merrienboer and Paas,
1998). A great deal of research has been carried out every year for implementing
an effective multimedia based learning environment basically in higher
education  sector.
Yet, multimedia in its broadest sense creates democratic learning environment
where  instructional  material  could  be  available  for  all  retaining  the  quality.  In
higher  education  multimedia  can  be  designed  to:
Provide  learning  opportunity  in  different  locations  and  in  diverse  schools.
Provide  opportunities  for  students  working  at  different  levels.
Enhance  learning  by  repetition  reinforcing  skills  and  learning.
41
Saha  and  Halder
It  can  provide  instruction  to  a  large  number  of  student  by  alimited  number  of
trained  and  experienced  teacher.
However there are various challenges faced while implementing this in real
environment  by  the  students  (Mayer,  2001).  Mayer  et.al  (2001)  suggested  that
learning if imparted without proper designing will lead to far reaching negative
consequences. The present article discusses a theoretical foundation of cognitive
architecture  and  provides  a  guideline  for  instructional  designer  and  cautions
against the use of .multimedia based instruction without considering significant
points.
Theoretical  foundations  of  multimedia  based  learning  environment
Pravio  (1971,  1978,  1986,  1990,  1991)  dual  coding  theory  endows  a  cognitive
architecture about how visualized instruction process in human memory. Pravio
(1991)  argues  about  how  human  mind  is  built  with  two  independent  and
interconnected coding systems and explains the two ways human can elaborate
any subject matter. First, elaboration emphasizes on visual code such as image,
concrete  object,  picture  or  event  and  the  Second,  on  verbal  code  such  as  word
speech,  language  or  semantic  codes.
Two  major  assumptions  worked  behind  this  theory  (Rieber,  1990);    Firstly,
information  coded  through  both  channel  (visual  and  verbal)  will  have  better
chance to remember more easily than one channel.  Secondly, verbal information
will  be  coded  by  verbal  channel  and  visual  information  will  be  coded  by  both
verbal  and  visual  channel.  Hence  the  assumptions  was  that  if  the  multimedia
based  learning  material  is  presented  in  both  visual  and  verbal  form  then  the
probability will be high to transfer information from working memory to long-
term  memory  as  compared  to  presenting  learning  material  in  one  form  (only
verbal).  Dual  coding  theory  also  supports  that  picture  are  better  remembered
than  words  for  redundant  encoding  in  nature  (Rieber,  1991).  Pictures  typically
results  in  better  memorizationthan  do  concrete/  abstract  words  (Paivio,  1971).
Furthermore, dual coding theory proposed that learning is more effective when
content material are concrete (Paivio & Csapo, 1973) than abstract or invisible
in  the  nature  of  content.
Baddeley  and  Hitch  (1974)  in  his  working  memory  model  also  discussed
visual and verbal code as pavio proposed in his dual coding theory. Difference
between  these  two  theories  is  that,  in  verbal  code  Baddeley  emphasizeson
phonological  information  and  paviostresseson  semantic  information  (Stephen,
2006). Under this working memory model, Baddeley and Hitch (1974) described
about  three  sub  system:
(a) Visuo-spatial  sketch  pad: This  sub-components  or  slave  systems  which